DApp One Word At A Time:
<a href="https://github.com/Jdubedition/dapp-owaat" target="_blank" class="v-btn v-btn--icon v-btn--round theme--dark v-size--default">
<span class="v-btn__content"><i aria-hidden="true" class="v-icon notranslate mdi mdi-git theme--dark"></i></span>
</a>
<br>
Molereum (an Ethereum private network):
<a href="https://github.com/Jdubedition/molereum" target="_blank" class="v-btn v-btn--icon v-btn--round theme--dark v-size--default">
<span class="v-btn__content"><i aria-hidden="true" class="v-icon notranslate mdi mdi-git theme--dark"></i></span>
</a>

# Preface
I apologize for how wordy this article is, but this is such a deep topic that I thought it appropriate (and I couldn't help myself :grinning:).  I am going to provide you with my perspective of the current crypto (short for cryptocurrency and will be used throughout this article) situation and then share with you my thoughts on the future of the space.  If you want to skip my perspective and go right into the example application, jump to the [DApp foray](#dapp-foray) section.

# What is this crypto hype?
Currently (at the time of writing this), I think it is safe to say that we are in a crypto [economic bubble](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economic_bubble).  There is a hysteria happening around cryptocurrencies because people are seeing the wild price increases by 10s to 100s of thousands of percentages over very short periods of time.  With these types of returns, a person that gets in at the right time and out at the right time can take a meager amount of money and turn it into a fortune.  The more stories of people becoming rich by timing things correctly, the more people that feel they are missing out and are then pressured to participate.

This type of thing has happened before, whether it is tulip bulbs, beanie babies, or the dot-com bubbles.  People get excited about other people getting excited, and that leads to a runaway valuation of the bulbs, toys, or companies.  The difference between these three examples are that while the bulbs and toys didn't have much fundamental value, the dot-com situation in the 1990's saw businesses using the Internet to make sales.  Some of these businesses started to see a larger amount of money by making the move to the Internet.  When people took notice that using the Internet was going to be the future, investors didn't want to be left out of the opportunity.  So, people started throwing money at many businesses that were not sound, but said they were going to use the power of the Internet to make money.

While the enthusiasm of businesses using the Internet was justified, the time frame for the maturity of this sector was not as short as many expected.  Businesses that were started during this period which survived and are thriving today include Amazon and Google, and to a lesser extent Ebay and Priceline (Booking Holdings).  Companies using the Internet as a core component of their business and making a lot of money is quite common in 2021, but it has taken many years to get here.  This is the situation I see happening with crypto today.  The decentralized (peer-to-peer) capability of blockchain technology that powers these crypto, is at the heart of a powerful answer to setting up a system of trust among a group of untrusted parties.  I think this technology will become the core of many highly valuable systems in the long-term, but there is going to be a crash due to exaggerated expectations in the short-term.  I will explain this in more detail in the next section.

# Blockchain
I highly recommend giving the Wikipedia article on [blockchain](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blockchain) a read.  It does a real nice job of giving an introduction to the many aspects fo the technology.  If you don't feel like reading that because you are already reading this, then let me give you my perspective of the topic.

At a very high-level, blockchain technology enables a system of trusting a history of transactions.  If you look at how the [fiat money](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fiat_money) financial systems work (at least in most countries) at a high-level, it is a system of trusting a history of transactions.  In fiat systems, a government (authority) allows a limited set of entities to distribute and track the units of currency that it wants to utilize for its citizens.  The trust of transactions between parties being legitimate is due to the authorized entities that are allowed to make changes to the ledger for the nation.  In this type of system, you cannot just say you have one million units of the currency, because the authorized entities will check their records and find that no other entities that had that many units has passed them to you.  Similar with using the blockchain, you cannot just say you have one million units of the currency, because the list of transactions on it will not show that you were granted those units by another entity.  The difference with blockchain technology is that it can be open to the public and modified by anyone.  You might be asking, then how can I trust the transaction history when anyone can make a copy and then claim to have an entity that passed one million units to their account?  In the first cryptocurrency that utilized this technology, Bitcoin, it leverages a technique called [proof of work](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proof_of_work) (PoW).  The summary of PoW is that you have to win a computational lottery by getting your computer to guess the correct value to provide to a [hashing function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hash_function) to get a specific output.  If you can win the lottery and get the output (hash value), then you are granted the ability to add a block (group of transactions) to the blockchain.  When other computers on the network then take a look at your blockchain, they can quickly verify that your lottery win provides the allowed hash value and so they will add your transaction block to their blockchain as well.  There is so much more to blockchain technology, but for now that is enough to launch us into the next point of conversation, decentralized applications.

# Decentralized applications
Cryptocurrencies provide a way for trusting transactions in a system without an authority, but by layering technology on top of that they can provide much more.  One of those capabilities is decentralized applications (dapps or DApps).  With decentralized applications, they use the cryptocurrency's transaction technology to store the state of an application, using the network of computers as a collective virtual machine.  Some cryptocurrencies do not have this capability, such as Bitcoin, but the most famous/popular of this category is Ethereum.  Ethereum provides the [Ethereum Virtual Machine](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/evm/) as the state machine for maintaining the state of applications built around it.  I recommend that you read most of the [Ethereum](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/) documentation, as their team did a really nice job of explaining the architecture of the Ethereum system and much surrounding the technology.

By combining the power of decentralized transactions and applications, Ethereum provides the ability to allow applications to transact and store the currency of the network.  The combination of these two technologies is what really unlocks the incredible value of the cryptocurrency.  Before diving deeper into Ethereum though, which is what the DApp that I wrote in conjunction with this article uses, I want to tie back to the intro of this article.  The ability to write applications that have their near real-time state available to the network, without a central authority, and transact value with anyone one the network is what makes this so cool and powerful.  This allows for people and systems to transact with people and systems, and those transactions are trusted and recorded by the network.  This is where my excitement for the cryptocurrency technology lies, but I have my reservations about the current state of the ecosystem.  An issue I see will all current cryptocurrencies is that as they gain popularity, in order to be a member of the approvers of transactions, you need to either have a large amount of computational resources (CPU, disk, and/or network) or have a large amount of units on the blockchain (read about [proof of stake](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proof_of_stake) if interested how that works), which unfortunately reduces the decentralization of the system.  Many teams and approaches are working on reducing these issues, but it is a very tough thing to do, because you need some sort of consensus/proof to ensure legitimate transactions are entered into the blockchain.  One of the attempts to reduce this centralization is the [proof of space](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proof_of_space), but we will need to see how that plays out in the long-term if one of the cryptocurrencies that uses this technology becomes popular and will face the pressures of other popular cryptocurrencies.  Another tough part is that with excessive speculation on the near-term impact of these cryptocurrencies, the USD equivalent prices of the currency will rise to levels that make running an application on the network cost prohibitive.  A higher price will incentivize people with deeper pockets to put their resources into participating in the network, making it even tougher for smaller operations to contribute.  Which then hurts the decentralized aspect of the cryptocurrencies.  So, they become a victim of their own success.  Beyond just creating more cryptocurrencies to distribute the load, there are other approaches that leverage the expensive but robust blockchains.  One of these systems work as a blockchain within a blockchain, allowing for nesting and aggregating blocks in the layer 2 system into one block of the layer one (or base) blockchain.  By dividing the transactional costs of one block on the main or base blockchain by a large number of transactions on the layer 2 system, makes for much less expensive application operating costs.  Maybe a future article will be about a layer 2 cryptocurrency? :face_with_cowboy_hat:  Even in layer 2 their are options that are considered on-chain vs off-chain, but that will take us too far away from the attempted focus of this article.  There are other approaches as well, but this article is already long, so I will just leave it for now and allow you to do the research yourself if you are interested.

# DApp foray
As mentioned above, I recommend first reading over the [Ethereum developer docs](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/) before starting with this code.

There are different frameworks available for building DApps on the Ethereum.  The one I choose, [Truffle Suite](https://trufflesuite.com/) is one of the most popular for beginners, which makes it very easy to get started with development.  Truffle Suite has three really nice aspects that make it easier to get started.  First, it has a tool named [Ganache](https://trufflesuite.com/ganache) which with a few clicks will create an Ethereum node on your local machine that has a lot of convenience settings for making it super easy to test your application on the node.  Second, the `truffle` CLI (command line interface) tool that provides an easy and robust contract testing and contract migration capability.  With this tool you can write unit tests that will verify the contracts will behave as expected and then in conjunction with Ganache, you can migrate contract changes to your local machine Ethereum node.  A note here, on the Ethereum mainnet (where costs are real) and testnets (where you should absolutely test before pushing to mainnet) the contracts are immutable, so once you deploy them you cannot change them.  When using Ganache and the `truffle` CLI, you will not experience this as the tools will replace the contracts without issue.  Just something to remain aware of.  On Ethereum networks you need to migrate the client applications to new contracts in order to make changes.  There are tools that should make this process easier, like [OpenZeppelin](https://docs.openzeppelin.com/openzeppelin/), but as of writing this I have not tried using them.  Might be a good topic for another article. :wink:  Third, Truffle Suite has the concept of boxes, which are the start of an application, that you can use to get started quickly and get the basic pieces in place for your DApp.

Thinking of what would be an easy but entertaining application to write that would use the Ethereum blockchain to store information, the game of one word at a time (OWAAT) <a href="https://github.com/Jdubedition/dapp-owaat" target="_blank" class="v-btn v-btn--icon v-btn--round theme--dark v-size--default">
<span class="v-btn__content"><i aria-hidden="true" class="v-icon notranslate mdi mdi-git theme--dark"></i></span>
</a> came to mind.  The game is simple, as each person is allowed to add one word to a story.  With the DApp, a person is allowed to add one word per transaction to a collective story.

With this DApp, I wanted to create a web application, so started with the Truffle React box.  From this unboxing, the port in truffle-config.js and getWeb.js needed to be changed from 8545 (Ethereum client default HTTP port) to the Ganache port of 7545.  From here tested out running the `truffle compile` process and the `truffle migrate` process.  Upon running the migration and then going into the `client` directory and running `yarn start` the basic React DApp was ready to go.  From this point modifications were made to the React client as well as substituting the default contract in the Truffle React box with the contract needed to store the story.

After creating the OWAAT DApp using the Truffle setup, the curiosity of how this would run on the Ethereum testnets or mainnets was the question.  Before going the route of deploying into the test networks though, the Ethereum documentation had discussed the notion of a running a private network.  A private network is an Ethereum network that is separate from other networks and a certain party restricts access to (which is the antithesis of the goal of decentralized applications, but useful when performing testing with a development team).  From this idea of wanting to setup a private network came the idea of the Molereum network. <a href="https://github.com/Jdubedition/molereum" target="_blank" class="v-btn v-btn--icon v-btn--round theme--dark v-size--default">
<span class="v-btn__content"><i aria-hidden="true" class="v-icon notranslate mdi mdi-git theme--dark"></i></span>
</a>  This private network allows for total control of the network, enabling setting any parameters you want for testing purposes.  This also is a good opportunity to learn more about how Ethereum nodes work together to form networks, and how the seed/genesis of a network is configured.

Building a private network is a good way to learn, but in future efforts I will (most likely) be using existing test networks due to speed of development.  Established test networks will have faucets in place, which enable one to request that their account received some currency of the test network.  It will be interesting to see what management of a crypto wallet is like with a bunch of test networks and a few production networks.

Overall, this DApp tip toes into the ecosystem of decentralized application development, but at this point some decisions need to be made about future development.  One issue, is that if you check [Etherscan gas tracker](https://etherscan.io/gastracker) you can see that transaction fees and times can be quite high, which for the purposes of this application is not a good experience.  For this issue I will need to pick an option from the [scaling](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/scaling/) section of the Ethereum docs or decide to try a non-Ethereum based network, such as Solana or Cardano.  Sticking with some of the Ethereum scaling options will enable reusing most of the existing tooling and code, so probably going to go that route, but we will see.  Another issue, is that contracts are immutable (at least on Ethereum but most likely others as that is what makes the contract trustworthy) and so I will take a look at frameworks that support contract management.  Lastly, I will need to host the client application on a centralized service.

Hope you enjoyed this article and learned a bit more about cryptocurrencies and the blockchain technology.  Please check [BountifulBytes](https://bountifulbytes.com) regularly for new articles!
