DApp One Word At A Time:
<a href="https://github.com/Jdubedition/dapp-owaat" target="_blank" class="v-btn v-btn--icon v-btn--round theme--dark v-size--default">
<span class="v-btn__content"><i aria-hidden="true" class="v-icon notranslate mdi mdi-git theme--dark"></i></span>
</a>

# Preface
This article builds off of the previous article, Cryptography In A Bottle, which was the first look writing a decentralized application on the Ethereum blockchain.  With the high prices of Ethereum transactions, it is a good idea to look at alternative networks for the application to be deployed to.

# Networks
When looking at what options are available to use for the application, there are considerations to account for.  If we use a network that is not based off of the Ethereum Virtual Machine, then the application contract code will need to be rewritten.  In an effort to leverage the contract code, we will then be looking at [Ethereum scaling options](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/scaling/) to see if there is a way to reduce the cost of transactions for the application.

Looking at the options that are available, which will leverage existing tooling, and then at the popularity of each choice, I narrowed it down to using the Polygon plasma chain.  With Polygon I can still leverage the existing contracts and Truffle framework for managing the deployment of the contracts.

# Deploying to the Polygon test network
In order to deploy to any blockchain network, you need to have a node/endpoint that is your access to one of the machines on the network.  Since these networks are decentralized, you could setup your own machine to be a part of the network.  Depending on the network you connect to though, the requirements for a machine to be a part of the network are usually quite high.  Even if your have a computer that is up to the task, it will take a long time (relative to wanting to develop applications) to get your computer caught up to the network.  The preferred method is to access an existing node/endpoint on the network, and for Polygon they have the options available listed in their [developer documents](https://docs.polygon.technology/docs/develop/network-details/network).

I initially was using the [MaticVigil](https://rpc.maticvigil.com/) service for connecting to the Mumbai-Testnet, but I would frequently run into issues deploying the contracts.  I found others talking about issues deploying contracts on MaticVigil when they were using the OpenZeppelin framework with upgradeable contracts.  It might be an issue with too many requests to the endpoint within a short period of time, because with upgradeable contracts framework is actually deploying three contracts (proxy, proxy admin, and contract you wrote).

An alternative RPC endpoint service that worked for me, which is listed in the Polygon docs, is [Moralis](https://moralis.io/).  By using their free service and the speedy nodes option, I was able to get a node/endpoint that was able to deploy the contracts to the testnet.

Now, the Truffle configuration needs to be modified to use this endpoint.  So in the [truffle-config.js](https://github.com/Jdubedition/dapp-owaat/blob/main/truffle-config.js) file I added the following section:
```js
    maticMumbai: {
      // Register for Moralis Speedy Node ID at https://moralis.io/
      provider: () => new HDWalletProvider({
        privateKeys: [testAccountPrivateKey],
        providerOrUrl: "https://speedy-nodes-nyc.moralis.io/" + moralisSpeedyNodeID + "/polygon/mumbai"
      }),
      network_id: 80001,
      confirmations: 2,
      timeoutBlocks: 200,
      skipDryRun: true
    },
```

The moralisSpeedyNodeID is the ID of the node that you registered for on Moralis.  The testAccountPrivateKey is the private key of an account in your crypto wallet (I use the [MetaMask](https://metamask.io/) extension).

With that configured, we now need to get MATIC associated with our account.  To do this, go to the [Polygon Faucet](https://faucet.polygon.technology/).  Provide the account (they call it wallet - which you will find wallet and account interchanged throughout the crypto community) address, make sure the Mumbai and MATIC token options are selected, and then click on the Submit button.  It will take a bit before the funds are available in your crypto wallet.

Once I verified that I had the funds (was 0.5 MATIC when I was using the faucet) in my account/wallet, I deployed the contract using Truffle.

`truffle migrate --network maticMumbai`

Contracts deployed, I then started the client of Dapp OWAAT application on my workstation and made sure that MetaMask was pointing to the Mumbai testnet (I used my Moralis RPC endpoint for this as well).  With the client running and working as expected on the test network, it is now time to move the deployment of the contracts to the main network.

# Deploying to the Polygon main network
### My experience getting tokens for mainnet
In this section I will describe my naive experience in trying to acquire MATIC tokens for the Polygon main network.  In short, I wasted about $200 on fees from services and the Ethereum network, so hopefully my hard learned lesson will save you some money.  If you are not interested in hearing about my experience, then skip to the next section.

In order to deploy to the main network, I needed to get tokens.  This was my first time attempting to use a main network of any blockchain.  My first thought was to use a service that I have heard a lot about, [Coinbase](https://www.coinbase.com/).  So, I setup an account on Coinbase and then purchased a small amount of MATIC tokens.  I used the send functionality within the Coinbase application to send the tokens to an address in my MetaMask wallet.  Coinbase confirmed that the tokens were now available in my account.  I clicked on the transaction link and it took me to the Etherscan page for the transaction.  When I checked my wallet, I didn't see the tokens for my account on the Polygon main network (which I setup using the https://polygon-rpc.com/ endpoint).

After a few searches, I found people mentioning that Coinbase uses ERC-20 tokens on the Ethereum main network for Polygon/MATIC purchases.  Since Polygon is linked with Ethereum, the tokens need to be migrated from one network to the other using the [Polygon bridge](https://wallet.polygon.technology/bridge).  To use the bridge, I found that I needed to pay for the transaction with Ether.  So, back to Coinbase to buy enough Ether to cover the upper bounds of the transaction and then sent this to my MetaMask wallet/account.  Upon checking my balance in MetaMask, I noticed that it was less than the amount of tokens I had received from my Coinbase purchase.  I realized then that Coinbase used some of my Ether to cover the network gas fees to transfer the tokens from Coinbase to my account.  With an Ether balance I could now transfer my ERC-20 tokens on the Ethereum network over to the Polygon network.  I used the Polygon bridge and requested the transfer.  I noticed that there were two amounts listed in the modal on the bridge, one that mentioned a USD amount about $20 and the other about $90.  I continued forward with the transfer and approved the ~$20 amount in MetaMask.  After some time I checked my wallet/account and the tokens were still not there.  I then checked the Etherscan page for the transaction and confirmed that the transaction showed an approval for the bridge.  I then checked the bridge again and noticed that upon a second attempt on the transfer that only the ~$90 amount was listed.  I searched on this a bit and found that ERC-20 token transfers first require a transaction to allow the Polygon bridge contract to move tokens for my account.  This was the transaction that I paid for and so now I could actually use the bridge to transfer tokens.  As the bridge notes, there are two transactions on the Ethereum network to successfully transfer the tokens and those would cost about $90 in Ether to complete.  If you take a look at the [gas tracker](https://etherscan.io/gastracker) on Etherscan, you will see USD price Uniswap Swaps.  This is similar to the bridge transaction, so you can see that it tracks the prices close to the estimate.

At this point, I didn't realize entirely that this contract approval and then transaction fee process was the way it works.  So, then I thought about staking the MATIC ERC20 tokens that were on the the Ethereum network, as transferring them back to Coinbase or paying the ~$90 bridge fee seemed excessive for the ~$50 I spent on the MATIC tokens on Coinbase (I did not have ~$50 in MATIC tokens, but I will get more into that later).  I ran the staking [reward calculator](https://wallet.polygon.technology/staking/rewards-calculator) and thought that I would like to have enough MATIC tokens to earn approximately 1 MATIC token a month.  With this number I rushed back to Coinbase and purchased the MATIC tokens and some additional Ether, as I knew there would be a fee for staking and for transferring the tokens to my MetaMask wallet/account.  After moving the tokens over, I went to the [delegator staking](https://wallet.polygon.technology/staking/) website and choose one of the validator nodes to join.  I then clicked delegate and paid the ~$20 in Ether fee.  Only then did I realize that I only paid the approval fee, as this site makes it a bit more clear.  The second fee for staking was less than half of what the bridge fee was, but still paying almost $40 for being able to earn approximately 1 MATIC a month did not seem that enticing.  Plus, I presumed that I would need to pay about the same amount of Ether to withdraw the tokens from staking, then pay the Ether fee to move the tokens from my MetaMask wallet/account to Coinbase.  Then pay any fee that Coinbase may charge for selling the tokens.  Even more bad decisions were made on my part to only move some tokens back to Coinbase and try to recover some USD spend on the MATIC tokens to buy more Ether to pay the Polygon bridge fee, to get the remaining tokens over to the network.  There are many things that I should have done differently here, but I did learn more about blockchain networks and the ecosystem around them in the process.  My hope is that you can learn from my experience without wasting money on fees like I did.

I did some more research to try to find exchanges that will allow you to use USD to purchase MATIC tokens directly on the Polygon main network.  I found that people mentioned that Binance allowed for purchasing tokens on either the Ethereum or Polygon networks.  Hooray, I thought to myself.  Just need to sign up for an account.  Go to Binance main website and thought to myself, why can I not find United States in the country list?  Realized then that Binance has its own USA specific domain, presuming that it must be its own legal entity due to currently relations between China and the USA.  Created my account on the USA specific website and then could not get the identify validation to work.  I tried five times to verify my identity and I just couldn't get it to work.  I thought seriously about just giving up and having this article be just a cautionary tale.  As usual, future me said no to giving up and went back to researching.  That is when I found a bunch of resources that mentioned exchanges where you can use a credit card (instead of Paypal, like Coinbase allows for) to purchase tokens.  I did not really like the idea of giving my credit card information to some website, in hopes of getting tokens, but I found one site that was mentioned in many places.  That site is [MoonPay](https://www.moonpay.com/).  In the next section, I will describe how I used MoonPay to purchase MATIC tokens on the Polygon main network and deployed the DApp to the network.

### Acquire tokens and deploy to the main network
For acquiring MATIC tokens on the Polygon main network, the best route I found was to use [MoonPay](https://www.moonpay.com/).  I do not enjoy that the fee for the approximately $50 in MATIC tokens was ~8%, but compared to the alternative route I tried it was a deal.

For the token, I selected Polygon(Polygon), provided my MetaMask account, went through the identification process with my phone, and then provided my credit card numbers.  They do mention that it could take up to a few hours on the website and it took about 90 minutes before I could see the tokens in MetaMask.

With the tokens in the account, it is time to deploy the DApp contracts to the Polygon main network.  Add this section to the `truffle-config.js` file:
```js
polygon: {
      // Register for Moralis Speedy Node ID at https://moralis.io/
      provider: () => new HDWalletProvider({
        privateKeys: [mainAccountPrivateKey],
        providerOrUrl: "https://speedy-nodes-nyc.moralis.io/" + moralisSpeedyNodeID + "/polygon/mainnet"
      }),
      network_id: 137,
      confirmations: 2,
      timeoutBlocks: 200,
      skipDryRun: true,
      gasPrice: 601000000000,
    },
```

Out of concern of the public RPC endpoint having the same timeout issues as the test network, I am using the Moralis provided endpoint.  Also, you may have noticed the gasPrice attribute.  At the time of wanting to deploy the DApp contracts onto the network, there was a higher load on it.  I attempted multiple deployments without setting this attribute, but I kept getting timeout errors.  I checked [Polygonscan](https://polygonscan.com/) for my account as I noticed my balance of MATIC had gone down slightly after all of the attempts.  Turns out, one contract was deployed but not completed.  I then checked the gas price on this transaction and noticed it was at 500 gwei.  On the [gas tracker](https://polygonscan.com/gastracker) I noticed that there were about 400 pending transactions at 500 gwei.  This made me think that 500 must be the max for Truffle by default (maybe other deployment tools as well), and so I probably needed to offer a higher price to the network in order to prioritize my deployment and get it out there.  Upon setting the gasPrice to 601 gwei, my contracts deployed without issue.  The total cost in MATIC to deploy all the contracts at 601 gwei was a little over 2.15, which means that with the price I paid for the MATIC tokens, I paid between $5-$6.  This is expensive compared to traditional (centralized) application deployments, but the good part is that as long as the Polygon mainnet is running, the contracts will be available for anyone to use.

# DApp OWAAT is now live
After all of that, my first decentralized application is live.  The client code is running on Cloudflare and the EVM contracts are deployed on the Polygon mainnet.

Hope you enjoyed this article and learned a bit more about deploying blockchain technologies. Please check BountifulBytes regularly for new articles!
