# Preface
This article is a concept piece.  The goal is to use this as an approach to [first principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/First_principle) thinking about building, maintaining, and evolving complex information systems.  I hope you find value in this approach, but I realize you may vehemently disagree and curse me for writing this (or some point between the two... or even have a reaction that I can not think of :grin:).

# Introduction
Using the components of [special relativity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Special_relativity), space, time, and observer (frame of reference), I think one can describe the performance of complex information systems.  Meaning, I propose that any problem set or issue encountered can be described by ratios of these three.  I am presenting this because I think it will help to make decisions while building new systems, determine which parts should be deleted or optimized in existing systems, and identify parts that are impacting degraded systems.

# Expanding the concept
### Space
With information systems, there is a useful truth ([information](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information)) that needs to be established and preserved.  An example of useful truth is storing the amount of money you own.  An example of truth that is probably not useful is the atomic orientations within a grain of sand on a beach.  With computer systems, we store this useful truth with data.  This data needs to exist somewhere and will introduce the one of the three components, space.  Without space, the data does not exist.  So, we need a place that this data is stored, whether that be a disk, flash, RAM, circuits, crystal, neurons, DNA, etc.

### Time
In computer systems, the duration of something is tracked by the number of cycles that have occurred.  These cycles are primarily determined by [crystal oscillators](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crystal_oscillator).  When computer systems are extended into information systems, the time is tracked by fractions (or in rare cases multiples) of rotations of the Earth.  The rotations of the Earth are days, which can be subdivided into hours, minutes, seconds, milliseconds, microseconds, nanoseconds, etc.  When we are measuring how long something takes in information systems, we usually use one of the units mentioned in the previous sentence.

### Observer
The third component in the information system is the observer, or maybe better understood as the frame of reference.  This frame of reference is a set of coordinates in space and time.  With information systems, the observer is probably going to be a person or computer, but it could take shape as other systems, collections, concepts, etc.  It is by understanding our frame of reference that we can make measurements, calculations, predictions, decisions, etc.

# Conclusion
For now, I just wanted to present this vignette and expand on it further in the future.  I hope this provides some value or is amusing at a minimum, but I do realize that this could be viewed as vapid and/or annoying.

Regardless of what you thought of this article, please check [BountifulBytes](https://bountifulbytes.com) regularly for new articles!
